 CLASS.HOW
 12/23/95

 Marilyn Price: 72332,2312

 ----------------------------------------------
 Working with classes: A Beginner's Perspective
 ----------------------------------------------

 Why this document was written
 -----------------------------

 I had been playing with Visual dBASE (and its predecessor dBASE for
 Windows) and lurking the Visual dBASE forum (formerly the dBASE for
 Windows forum) for about a year when I got an opportunity to write my
 first real program.  I had designed simple forms before, but hadn't
 actually made them do anything that wasn't already covered with the
 buttons on the speedbar.

 The experience was an eye-opener.  It made me realize that, while I had
 read up on OOP and thought I understood the terminology, I really didn't
 understand the practicalities.  So I posted an incoherent message in the
 forum, asking for enlightenment.  This spawned a long thread that revealed
 (among other things) (a) that I was not the only one confused on some of
 these issues, (b) the correct way to do things, and   one message to "Read
 the manual".  This HOW TO is a direct result of that thread.

 Types of Classes
 ----------------

 Classes are the building blocks for just about everything in Visual dBASE. 
 Classes provide the basis for forms, pushbuttons, entryfields, text,
 radiobuttons, and all the other visual tools.  Even Visual dBASE itself is
 an instance of a class.  When you write your programs, you'll be using
 classes.  (See OOP.HOW for an excellent glossary and introduction to these
 concepts.)

 There are two main types of classes in Visual dBASE - standard and custom.
 Standard classes are provided by dBASE itself and form the foundation that
 all the rest is build upon.  Custom classes are more specialized.  Some
 custom classes are provided with Visual dBASE.  Others are available in
 various locations, including CompuServe libraries.  Some are commercially
 available.  And, of course, there will be those that you write yourself!

 Regardless of the source, classes all have certain characteristics in
 common.  Documentation about a class should include the following:
   1.  A brief statement or description of what the class does
   2.  A list of the properties (and what they mean)
   3.  A list of the methods (and what, in general, they do)
   4.  A list of events (and what triggers them)

 Standard Classes
 ----------------

 Let's look at some standard classes first.  Most of the standard classes
 are centered around the forms designer.  When you're learning to work with
 Visual dBASE, you'll probably start by designing a form and dropping some
 objects (like radiobuttons, entry fields, text) onto it.  These objects
 are classes.  The form you are designing is also a class.

 If you look at the generated code, you'll see lines like these:

    CLASS CABLEFORM OF FORM
    DEFINE ENTRYFIELD ENTRYFIELD7 OF THIS;

 The first (CLASS CABLEFORM OF FORM) is the start of a class definition,
 defining the class CABLEFORM based on the class FORM.  In this example,
 FORM is the superclass and CABLEFORM is a subclass of FORM.

 The second (DEFINE ENTRYFIELD) looks like it could be a class definition,
 but it is not.  It is  an instantiation of a class, defining the instance
 ENTRYFIELD7 of a class called ENTRYFIELD.

 Classes have characteristics called Properties, Events, and Methods that
 you can inspect and modify as needed.  Part of my confusion stemmed from
 these names and what is classified as which.

 If you look up a class in the Language Reference, you'll see the
 components of all three of these types listed alphabetically in one long
 list labeled properties.  Strictly speaking, anything associated with a
 class is a property of the class.  But the inspector splits them into
 three different groups and calls one of these groups properties. 
 Confusing.

 One definition I read said that any procedure or function contained
 between the CLASS and ENDCLASS statements is said to be a method of the
 class.  You'll see both event handlers and "built-in" methods referred to
 as methods in some of the literature available.  If they had different
 names, perhaps this portion would be clearer.  

 For the remainder of this discussion, methods will refer to actions
 appearing on the Methods page of the inspector for the class and
 properties will refer to the properties appearing on the Properties page
 of the inspector for the class.

 There are several ways to find out what properties, methods, and events
 are available for a given class.  Standard classes can be looked up in the
 Language Reference manual or in the on-line help.  Custom classes should
 have some sort of documentation provided.  Properties, methods, and events
 for both types are also listed in the Inspector. 

 The Inspector can be invoked in two primary ways.  If you are looking at
 an object on a form in design mode, then the Inspector is another window
 appearing on the desktop.  If you can't find the inspector immediately,
 right click on the object and select Inspector from the speed menu that
 appears.  

 Another way to invoke the inspector is to instantiate an object from the
 class and use the Inspect() function.  For example, type inspect(_app) in
 the Command Window.  A property box appears.  These are the properties,
 events, and methods for the application (Visual dBASE) itself.  It's a
 short list, but it's there.

 The inspector has three pages - one for properties, one for events, and
 one for methods.  What's the difference between these three, when do you
 use each, and what do you do with them?

 Properties
 ----------

 Properties are the variables used by the class.  If you look at the list
 of properties for a class, you'll see that most of them are nouns.  These
 include items such as height, color, datalink, and speedtip. 

 This is where you enter the specifics for your subclass.  For example, you
 can datalink an entryfield to a field in your table and the class will now
 take care of any modification and updates to that field.  You can define a
 speedtip for the entryfield so that, when the mouse cursor rests on the
 field, a bubble help tip will appear.  If you don't put anything in the
 space next to SpeedTip, no bubble appears.

 Most properties are self-explanatory and all are (or should be) available
 for lookup in the on-line help or the Language Reference.  

 For example, let's lookup "Speedtip" in the on-line help. Click on the "?"
 speedbutton and click on "Search".   In the box with the cursor, type
 speedt and you'll see speedtip show up highlighted.  Click on [Show
 Topics], then on [Go To] and you'll find a short description of what it
 is, the fact that the default value is blank, which classes include
 speedtip as a property, and a way to suppress an existing speedtip.


 Methods
 -------

 The third page of the inspector is for methods (I'll come back to page 2
 in a minute).  If you look at this list, you'll see that most of these are
 active verbs.

 Let's look at the list of methods for an entryfield.  It's relatively
 short.  It consists of Copy, Cut, Keyboard, Move, Paste, Release,
 SetFocus, and Undo.  This is a list of the "built-in" actions that the
 entryfield class provides to you.  For the most part, you'll leave these
 actions alone and let the class do the processing.  Notice that, in the
 inspector, there's a function pointer next to each Method.  For example,
 the words FORM::SETFOCUS appear in the box next to the SetFocus method. 
 This function pointer (FORM::SETFOCUS) is the name of the procedure or
 function which contains the code run to implement the SetFocus method. 
 Why would you ever need this?  That's covered below.

 What does each one do?  Let's look setfocus() up in the on-line help. 
 You'll see a description of what it does and which classes it is a
 property of.  If it needed any parameters, these would also be defined.

 Why would you ever want to change any of these?  Most of the time you
 won't.  However, suppose you wanted to initialize a large array when a
 form opens.  You could place the code in an OnOpen event handler (more on
 events in a moment).  If you do, then the code would execute just after
 the form opens.  If it's a lengthy piece of code, your users may be
 staring at a form that looks like its ready to go, but doesn't respond to
 anything.  This is one case where you may want to modify the open() method
 for the form.  This way, the processing takes place before the form
 appears.  Once the form shows up on the screen, it's ready to use.  The
 delay is the same, but the perception is different, and may make for
 happier users.

 To change the behavior of a method, you need to add a procedure with the
 _same_ _name_ to your class definition.  In the scenerio just described,
 you would add a procedure called Open.  This overrides the default method. 
 If you want to supplement rather than replace the default method, then
 your procedure will have to call the superclass's method.  It would look
 like this:

     Procedure Open
        ** whatever code you're adding
        super::Open()

 Super:: is a scope resolution keyword that tells Visual dBASE where to
 find the procedure you want to run.  If you look at the Inspector for the
 form, you'll see that the default method for Open is Form::Open. 
 Substituting super:: for form:: will provide the correct name to use to
 call that method.

 Events
 ------

 The second page of the inspector is a list of events.  I've saved them for
 last as I've had the most confusion with this section.  If you look at a
 list of events, you'll see that these are mostly phrases with the spaces
 squeezed out, such as OnChange, OnDesignOpen, OnMiddleMouseUp, and When or
 passive verbs, such as Valid.

 For the standard classes, these events are usually blank.  That is,
 there's nothing in the right hand column of the inspector.  That's because
 these are hooks provided by the class for a programmer to hang code on. 
 In essence, the class is saying that when this event happens (the field is
 changed, the form is opened in design mode, or the middle mouse button is
 released) that it will check to see if you've added anything here and
 execute your code before proceeding with its own processing.

 "On" events process the code just after the triggering event.  That is,
 any code in an OnOpen event routine will execute after the form opens. 
 Any code in an OnClick event will execute after the pushbutton is clicked.

 Let's look an event up in the on-line help.  If you lookup
 OnMiddleMouseUp, you'll find which classes include this event, the data
 type, and the fact that it will pass three parameters to your subroutine. 
 These parameters are defined and explained.

 An interesting point here is the data type of an event.  It says "Function
 pointer or codeblock".  These are new datatypes with the Windows versions.

 A codeblock is a section of code inserted directly in the event
 assignment.  It's a procedure or function without a name!  For details on
 constructing a codeblock, see other sources.  To add a codeblock to an
 event, click on the event in the inspector and type directly into the
 white space that appears on the right hand side.

 To add a larger block of code to an event, click on the event in the
 inspector, then click on the little "wrench" button to open the Procedure
 Editor.  Visual dBase will construct a proper name for the procedure or
 function and insert this function pointer into the inspector.

 If you click on the wrench for the OnMiddleMouseUp, you'll see that Visual
 dBASE has assigned a function pointer of
 "ENTRYFIELDX::Entryfieldx_OnMiddleMouseUp" (where Entryfieldx is the name
 of the entryfield you are looking at).  This appears in the right side of
 the inspector.  In the main box of the Procedure Editor, the following
 appears:

    Procedure ENTRYFIELDX_OnMiddleMouseUp(flags, col, row)

 And you type your code here.

 If you save the form and then edit it as a program, you'll see that a line
 has been added to the entry field definition that looks like this:

     OnMiddleMouseUp CLASS::ENTRYFIELDx_ONMIDDLEMOUSEUP,;

 When the form is instantiated, this line will tell it where to find the
 code to be executed when this event is triggered.

 At the end of the class definition, you'll find that Visual dBASE has
 added this:

     Procedure ENTRYFIELDx_OnMiddleMouseUp(flags, col, row)

 followed by the code you typed in.

 Unlike methods, you can name these procedures anything you like since you
 are assigning the name in the object definition.  However, if the
 superclass already has an event handler for this event and you are just
 interested in supplementing that handling, make a note of the name of the
 event handler before you overwrite it.  (It's displayed in the right hand
 side of the inspector.)  This is used more with custom classes than the
 standard classes.

 Custom Classes
 --------------

 Speaking of custom classes, let's look at one in the form designer to see
 some of the differences.  Create a new form and drop two objects on it. 
 Make the first object a pushbutton from the Standard page of the Control
 Pallet.  Make the second object the "Next" button from the Custom page. 
 And let's look at the differences in these two.

 Properties.  The differences here (besides position and height) include
 the name, text, and classname.  All reasonable differences.

 Methods.  There are no differences in the methods for these two objects. 
 The "Next" button inherits all its methods from its superclass -
 Pushbutton.

 Events.  There is one difference in the events for these two buttons.  The
 "Next" button has code assigned to the OnClick event.  In fact, if you
 click on the OnClick event and click its wrench, Visual dBASE will warn
 you that the event is linked to a procedure outside of the form and ask if
 you want to overwrite it!  

 You can still override it or supplement it, using the techniques discussed
 here.

 SUPER::
 -------

 Earlier, I used SUPER::Open() to reference the form's open method and
 mentioned that FORM:: could have also been used.  How do you know when to
 use which?  The SUPER:: keyword is short-hand for whatever the superclass
 happens to be.  In the example above, this is the standard FORM class, so
 SUPER::Open() is the same as FORM::Open().

 When supplementing a method's behavior (instead of overriding it), you
 must call the base class method somewhere along the way, either at the
 beginning, in the middle, or at the end of your method code.  In my
 example above, if I had not included the call to SUPER::Open(), the form
 would never open!

 Some final thoughts
 -------------------

 This How To has tried to summarize some of the interesting things I've
 learned about classes over the last couple of weeks.  Writing them down
 has helped clarify them for me.  I hope it does the same for you.

 My thanks to the TeamB members who reviewed this and added their helpful
 comments.  Especially to Ken "Zak" Chan who provided the clearest
 explanation of most of this information and whose messages were used
 extensively in the preparation of this how to.

    --------------------------------------------------------------------
    DISCLAIMER: the author is a member of TeamB for dBASE, a group of
    volunteers who provide technical support for Borland on the DBASE
    and VDBASE forums on Compuserve. If you have questions regarding
    this .HOW document, or about dBASE/DOS or Visual dBASE, you can
    communicate directly with the author and TeamB in the appropriate
    forum on CIS. Technical support is not currently provided on the
    World-Wide Web, via the Internet or by private E-Mail on CIS by
    members of TeamB.

    .HOW files are created as a free service by members of TeamB to
    help users learn to use Visual dBASE more effectively. They are
    posted first on the Compuserve VDBASE forum, edited by both TeamB
    members and Borland Technical Support (to ensure quality), and then
    may be cross-posted to Borland's WWW Site. This .HOW file MAY NOT BE
    POSTED ELSEWHERE without the explicit permission of the author, who
    retains all rights to the document.
    
         Copyright 1995, Marilyn Price. All rights reserved.
    --------------------------------------------------------------------

 EoHT: MLP