    --------------------------------------------------------------------
    DISCLAIMER: the author is a member of TeamB for dBASE, a group of
    volunteers who provide technical support for Borland on the DBASE
    and VDBASE forums on Compuserve. If you have questions regarding
    this .HOW document, or about dBASE/DOS or Visual dBASE, you can
    communicate directly with the author and TeamB in the appropriate
    forum on CIS. Technical support is not currently provided on the
    World-Wide Web, via the Internet or by private E-Mail on CIS by
    members of TeamB.

    .HOW files are created as a free service by members of TeamB to
    assist users to learn to use Visual dBASE more effectively. They are
    posted first on the Compuserve VDBASE forum, edited by both TeamB
    members and Borland Technical Support (to ensure quality), and then
    may be cross-posted to Borland's WWW Site. This .HOW file MAY NOT BE
    POSTED ELSEWHERE without the explicit permission of the author, who
    retains all rights to the document.

    (c) 1995 A.A.Katz, All Rights Reserved.
    --------------------------------------------------------------------


 OOP.HOW
 9-4-1995
 
 How To Think Object Oriented
 ----------------------------
 With Visual dBase
 __________________
 
 By A. A. Katz

 See also: HOW TO Pass Data Form-to-Form
           HOW TO Manage Forms (SDI/MDI)
           HOW TO Use FORM/CLASS::/SUPER::/THIS
           HOW TO Use Object References
           HOW TO - OOP Glossary
           HOW TO Do Event-Driven Programs

 Contents:   What is OO?
             How Is It Different From Past Programming Architectures
             Why OO?
             OO Concepts
             An OO Glossary
             Event-Driven Programming
             The Instance (Object) Reference Variable
	     Form, This, Class::, Super:: and _app
             Getting Rid of Objects
             Using Sessions To Encapsulate
             Modal: The One Time an Object Does "Return"
	     The .WFM, .PRG, .QBE, .CFM, .CC Files
             Thinking Tips

 Introduction
 ------------

 The move to Object-Oriented programming is often difficult, even for
 experienced programmers. In the past, learning a new language only 
 required getting familiar with new syntax. 
 
 OO demands much more - a major shift in your thinking. In the way
 you visualize your programs and your code.
 
 The process is, admittedly, not easy. But the benefits to your users
 and your own productivity are so enormous they compensate for the
 learning curve - and then some.
 
 Visual dBase has one of the simplest and most elegant OO implementa-
 tions around. It's the perfect platform for your first Object-Oriented
 projects.
 
 
 What Is OO?
 -----------
 
 Object-oriented programming is a method of programming using objects
 - self-contained entities with built-in behaviors and data.


 How Is It Different From Past Programming Architectures?
 --------------------------------------------------------

 If you've programmed before, it's likely that you used -procedural- 
 methods. Your programs started at point "A", went to point "B" and
 returned to point "A". 

 Your user-interfaces were based on a -hierarchical- menu structure.
 The user navigated down your program using nested menus and came
 back using <Escape> or some other backup key.

 In OO, Objects are "launched" - created, activated - and then control
 is turned over to the end-user. There is no forward and back. Each object
 has its own "life" independent of all other objects.


 Why OO?
 -------

 For The Programmer - The primary benefit of OO to the programmer (among
 many) is -reusability-. Each object is self-contained and self-running.
 If designed properly, objects can be reused over and over in program
 after program without adjustment. No required variable declarations,
 calling routines, linking issues. Theoretically, you should eventually
 be able to write entire programs with little or no code. Just combine
 objects, set a few properties and you're off and running.

 For The User - In general, programs developed with OO empower users.
 No longer linked to required program flow, these independent objects
 encourage you to create programs that hand control to the end-user.
 Each user can customize your program to serve their work environment by
 selecting objects in the order appropriate to their task and habits
 - not according to a rigid scheme enforced by your menu hierarchy.


 OO Concepts
 -----------

 Object-Oriented programming is based on a handful of key concepts.
 You MUST master these in order to create reusable and effective
 classes of objects.

 ------Encapsulation. 

 You're handing off control of the objects to your user. You
 have no idea whatosever of how many objects of which kind
 your user will pop up onscreen at any given point. The best way to
 ensure that everything will work together, regardless of the user's
 choices, is to guarantee that every object will work alone and
 independently.

 Each object must contain all its data and procedures and be completely
 -isolated- from every other object. It wouldn't do to have one object
 overwrite another. Or to have a procedure in one object run on data from
 another object!

 When we refer to an object's data, we are not talking about
 your user's tables. Objects can, and often do, share tables.

 An object's data is the values stored in the object's properties.
 It is critical to isolate that data. If you have two Client windows
 onscreen at the same time, each window must protect its own Client Number
 so that the second window's Client Number doesn't overwrite the first. 

 Isolating these properties and behaviors is called Encapsulation.


 ------ Inheritance.

 Objects have the ability to inherit properties and behaviors from other
 objects. This is critical for reusability - the capability to modify an
 object to a specific application without having to rewrite it.
 
 Assume, for example, an AUTOMOBILE object. It has certain inherent
 properties (such as tires, engine and trunk) and behaviors
 (start, forward, backup and stop).
 
 Using OO, you can create a whole new object called HELICOPTER from
 AUTOMOBILE. HELICOPTER has all the properties and behaviors of AUTOMOBILE
 plus additional properties (rotors) and behaviors (up) particular to
 this new object.
 
 HELICOPTER is said to have -inherited- the properties (tires, engine) and
 behaviors (start, forward, backup, stop) from AUTOMOBILE.
 
 Inheritance improves productivity enormously. You should never have to
 "reinvent the wheel" using OO.
 
 
 ------ Polymorphism. 
 
 Objects can override their inherited behaviors and properties.
 
 Your "child" object can redefine the "start" and "stop" behaviors of
 AUTOMOBILE more suitably for HELICOPTER - changing these behaviors to
 "take off" and "land".
 
 Polymorphism (which means literally, "multiple shapes") enhances
 reusability of objects. You don't have to discard AUTOMOBILE as a
 parent for HELICOPTER just because its "start" and "stop" properties don't
 quite accurately describe the behavior of HELICOPTER.
 
 
 An OO Glossary
 --------------
 
 It's perfectly natural when learning new concepts to try to find
 analogies to your previous knowledge. In this case, don't do it!
 
 OO is not at all analogous to procedural programming. You'll find your
 thinking shifts more easily if you attach the right terms to your new 
 concepts. 

 Therefore, it may help, before you go much further, to familiarize yourself
 with the vocabulary of Object-Oriented Programming:


 Class - A Class is a definition of an object.

        CLASS Automobile                      &&class
          This.Tires = 'Radial'
          This.Engine = 'Six Cylinder'
          This.Trunk = 'Hatchback'
          This.Start = CLASS::Turn key
          This.Stop = CLASS::Press Brake
        ENDCLASS

        Hint: Many beginners mistake a CLASS for a program or procedure.
        A CLASS is NOT executable code. It is a blueprint only. 
        Just like a real blueprint, you can't live in the house 
        represented by the blueprint until you build it.


 SubClass - A "child" class derived, through inheritance, from another
        Class.

        CLASS Helicopter of Automobile        &&subclass
          This.Rotors = 6
          This.Start = CLASS::Take_Off
          This.Stop = CLASS::Land
        ENDCLASS


 SuperClass - The "parent" class of a subclass. In this case, AUTOMOBILE is
        the "SuperClass" of HELICOPTER.


 Property - Properties are similar to variables in that they are used to
        store information. A FirstName property acts the same as a
        FirstName variable - providing a storage space for the various
        possible first names. 

        However, unlike variables, they don't  "belong" to programs or
        procedures, they belong to the object.

        Properties define an object's characteristics.

        CLASS Helicopter of Automobile
           This.Rotors = 6                             &&Properties
           This.Tires = 'Pirelli'
           This.Engine = 'Jet'
        ENDCLASS

        A wonderful change from procedural programming to object-
        oriented programming is the way properties effect behavior.
        If you wanted to change the the value of a field, you'd have
        to set the value and then redisplay:

           cMyVar = "Hello"
           @ 2,1 say cMyvar
        
        In object programming, the change is -encapsulated-, built
        right in as a behavior of the object:

           OO:  This.Value = 'Hello'

        Change the property and the onscreen result is automatically
        altered to match the current property value. Needless to say,
        this saves a huge amount of coding.

 Method - A method is the code that executes the -behavior- of an
        object. And how are behaviors implemented in programming? With
        procedures and functions. 

        Methods are procedures and functions that belong to an object.

        CLASS HELICOPTER OF AUTOMOBILE
            This.Start = CLASS::TakeOff

            PROCEDURE Take Off                          &&Method
              if CLASS::Checklist()
                 if CLASS::TurnEngineOn()
                    if CLASS::Taxi()
                       if CLASS::GetClearance()
                           CLASS::LiftOff()
                       endif
                    endif
                 endif
              endif
              
        ENDCLASS


 Instance  - The actual "object" derived from a Class.

        Define AlansCar of Automobile                 &&instance
        Define JanesHelicopter of HELICOPTER

	OO supports multiple instances simultaneously of the same class.

        Define AlansCar of Automobile                 &&more instances
        Define JanesCar of Automobile
        Define OurFamilyCar of Automobile

        MyCar = New Automobile()                      &&more instances -
                                                      &&this time using
                                                      &&"New" instead of
                                                      &&define.

	Instances are the objects end-users actually see and use.
        Classes and subclasses are the programming tools you use to
        create them.


 Instantiate - Create a single instance of your class in memory. In other
        words, make an object from your class definition.

        This is analogous to "building the house". The class is the
        blueprint. When you instantiate, Visual dBase builds the actual
        house from the blueprint you provide in your class definition.

        DEFINE AlansCar of Automobile             &&Instantiations
        or
        AlansCar = New Automobile()


 Container Object - Some objects have the language-level ability to
        contain other objects. The Form object is the primary container
        object in Visual dBase. A form can contain pushbuttons, browse
        objects, editor objects, etc. 

        However, a pushbutton, which is not a container object, cannot
        contain a Form or a browse or an editor.

 Standard Class - Visual dBase includes approximately 30 standard
        classes - built-in class definitions from which you can create
        instances or custom subclasses. 

        Forms, array objects and screen controls like pushbuttons,
        entryfields, browses and checkboxes are all standard classes.


 Base Class - The Base Class is the form blueprint that's used each
        time you create a new form using the Form Designer.

        Visual dBase has an amazing new capability that lets you
        use your own forms as the Base Class for new forms.

        This is extremely useful for standardizing the look and feel
        across an application. Your custom Base Class may include
        speedbar buttons, titles, status bars, rectangles or
        any other controls you wish to appear on all your new forms.

        When you define your own Base Class, the forms that result
        are third-generation subclasses:

	1. Form		                  &&Built-in base class

	  2. Class AUTOMOBILE of Form()   &&Your new base class which
                                          &&is a subclass of form

            3.   Class HELICOPTER of AUTOMOBILE
                                          &&Your new Form class, derived
					  &&from Automobile, which was
					  &&in turn, derived from Form.

                                                 
 Custom Class - Visual dBase allows you to create custom classes from
        scratch or from standard classes or other custom classes.

        Class Automobile                  &&From scratch

        Class Automobile(f,n) of Form(f,n)
                                          &&From base class form

        Class Helicopter(f,n) of Automobile(f,n)
                                          &&From custom class form

        Classes you create are called Custom Classes to distinguish them
        from the built-in Standard Classes.

 Constructor - The Constructor Code is part of the class "blueprint" for
        objects. It includes all properties and their values. It does not
        include the methods of the class (procedures and functions). 

        In the case of a container object, like the Form, the Constructor
        also includes the definition of all objects contained by the Form.
   
           Hint: Understanding what constitutes Constructor Code is
           crucial to using the Visual dBase two-way tools. 

           You cannot add new properties or methods in the Constructor
           Code of an object used in the Two-Way tools like the Form
           Designer and Menu Designer. This area is reserved for the tools.
           You can, however, set values or include or remove built-in
           properties.

           To add new properties, you have to build them into a custom
           class or add them dynamically during an event such as OnOpen.

           CLASS Myform(f,n) of Form(f,n)               ------------
              This.Top = 2                                          |
              This.Left = 2                                         |
              This.Width = 40                                       |
              This.Height = 20                                      |
                                                                    |
              DEFINE PUSHBUTTON PUSHBUTTON1 OF THIS;                |
                 PROPERTY;                                     Constructor
                 Top  3,;                                           |
                 Left  3,;                                          |
                 Width 5,;                                          |
                 Height 1.06,;                                      |
                 ColorNormal "W+/N"                     ------------

             PROCEDURE FORM_OnOpen                      ------------
             This.FormNumber = 2                                    |
             && The OnOpen is a procedure known                     |
             && as a "method" when included in a                 Methods
             && class definition. Sometimes also                    |
             && called a "member". This.FormNumber                  |
             && is a "custom property" of the form.     ------------

          ENDCLASS


 Event-Driven Programming
 ------------------------
 
 The key change from DOS procedural languages to Windows and Visual dBase
 is "event-driven" programming. This is not an Object Orientation
 concept so much as a language architecture built into most Windows
 development platforms.

 In event-driven programming, your application becomes -reactive-, not
 -proactive-. This may be the hardest Windows-programming idea to get
 a handle on. Once you "launch" the form or menu that starts your
 program, you no longer initiate events. Instead, you -respond- to events
 that Visual dBase captures from Windows and your user. 

 An event can be a mouse click (OnClick) or keystroke (Key). It can be
 a move to another program or window (onGotFocus, OnLostFocus). It can
 be an internal Visual dBase event such as validating data-entry (Valid)
 or allowing access to a control (When). 

 An "event-driven" program consists of only two core elements:
        
        1. Opportunities for input/events
        2. "What-ifs"

 Your user-interface code consists of "opportunities" for events: Forms,
 pushbuttons, menus, browse objects, editors, entryfields, etc.

 Your "what-if" code consists of "Event Handlers". Visual dBase traps an 
 event - like a mouse click. It looks to see if you have an event handler
 for that particular event and object. If you do, Visual dbase "fires"
 your event - runs your procedure or function.
 
 To build an event handler, you just link your code (method) to the object
 that fires the event:

            CLASS MyForm(f,n) of Form(f,n)
               This.top = 2
               This.left = 2
               This.Height = 20
               This.Width = 40

               Define PUSHBUTTON1 of This;           &&object
                 Property;
                 Top 4,;
                 Width 20,;
                 Text  'Press this button',;
                 OnClick CLASS::PUSHBUTTON1_OnClick  &&Link Event Handler
            
               PROCEDURE PUSHBUTTON1_OnClick          &&Event handler
                 This.ColorNormal = 'R/W'             &&Method
                 This.Text = 'Button is Pressed'

           ENDCLASS

 Each standard object has its own built-in events. For a list of events
 for each class of object, highlight the object in the Form Designer. Pop
 up the Inspector and click on the Events page, which lists each available
 event for the object selected.


 A -very- partial list of events and when they fire:

     OnOpen (when a form opens)
     OnClick (when left mouse button is clicked)
     OnGotFocus (when the user moves to the object)
     OnLostFocus (when the user moves off the object)
     Valid (when the user confirms or attempts to move off the control)
     When (before a user accesses an object)
     OnClose (when a form is closed)
     CanClose (when the user attempts to close a form)
     CanNavigate (when the user attempt to change a record)
     OnChange (when the value of an object is changed)
     OnLeftDblClick (when the user double clicks left mouse button)
     OnSelChange (when selection in a list is changed)

       Hint: The initial inclination of procedural programmers is to try
       to use Visual dBase and Windows to emulate their former procedural
       strategies. Once again, don't do it.

       You won't get the benefits of OO, Windows and Visual dBase. Your
       productivity will suffer for it, as will your users'. And you'll
       be frustrated by all the code that "no longer works right" in your
       new Visual dBase application.

 The bulk of your business code will reside in (or be called from) event-
 handlers. Calculations are often done from OnChange events. Records are
 added, saved or abandoned from pushbutton OnClick events or from Browse
 CanNavigate events. New objects are launched from menu or pushbutton
 OnClick events.

 Validation is also handled differently in event-driven programming. You
 are probably used to validating each field before moving on to the next
 In event-driven programs, there is no guaranteed sequence of fields.
 In fact, there is no guarantee the user will ever access a given field,
 let alone enter appropriate data in it.

 The event-driven model does most of its validation in a single "OK" or
 "Save" pushbutton OnClick event. You look at the whole object's data,
 not at a field at a time to perform validation:

          PROCEDURE OKBUTTON_OnClick
             if empty(Form.Entyfield1.Value)
                MsgBox('Sorry, Customer Number Required!')
                Form.Entryfield1.SetFocus()
 
             elseif empty(Form.Entryfield2.value)
                MsgBox('Sorry, Customer Name Required!')
                Form.Entryfield2.SetFocus()
 
             elseif   etc....
 
             else
                Select MyTable
                Form.SaveRecord()
             endif

       Hint: Procedural DOS applications simply don't port intact to any
       event-driven environment. If you  want to take advantage of your
       legacy code, bring over the "guts"  of it. Use cut-and-paste to
       build event handlers from your procedural business code.

       But leave the DOS interface code in DOS.


 The Instance (Object) Reference
 -------------------------------
 
 If you can have multiple instances of HELICOPTER, you must be able to
 distinguish MYHELICOPTER from YOURHELICOPTER. Instances in real-life are
 recognized by names, or "tail numbers" or license plates or serial
 numbers.

 One instance of a class is distinguished from another by its Instance
 Reference Variable - a unique "name" for each instance of each class.

 Since instances of classes are also -objects-, the "name" of an object is
 sometimes also called the Object Reference Variable.

 Like most of the indirect references in software (variables, fields, etc.),
 the Instance Reference Variable contains the =address= of the object, not
 the object itself.
 
          oMyHelo = New Helicopter()

 In the above code line, Visual dBase creates a new Helicopter object
 and stores its address in oMyHelo.

 Once you've got the Instance Reference Variable for an object, you can
 talk to it directly - change its properties, add new properties, fire
 its methods:

         oMyHelo = New Helicopter()             &&Make new instance
         oMyHelo.TailNumber = 'A23456'          &&Define new property
         oMyHelo.Entryfield1.Value = 1          &&Set a default value
         oMyHelo.Open()                         &&Open MyHelo form
         oMyHelo.Entryfield1.SetFocus()         &&Fire the SetFocus method

 You can see that the Instance Reference Variable gives you enormous 
 control over the object. You can preset default values before opening,
 make controls visible or invisible, enabled or disabled. In fact, you
 can do anything from outside the object that you can do within the object
 as long as you have the Instance Reference Variable.

 The Instance Reference Variable is a variable like any other. It can
 be passed as a parameter, stored to another variable

           cCurrHelo = oMyHelo
 
 and released.

 But there's a downside to that. It is also -scoped- like any other
 variable. And if the Instance Reference Variable goes out of scope,
 you've lost all ability to set properties, read properties or fire methods
 from outside the object. 

 If your Instance Reference is a private variable, it disappears when the
 current procedure "Return"s, even if the object is still active onscreen!

 Another potential pitfall to using a variable to store the instance
 address is that you may overwrite one variable with another when you
 attempt to create multiple instances:

            oMyHelo = New Helicopter()    &&First instance
            oMyHelo = New Helicopter()    &&Second Instance

 The second Helicopter() will overwrite the first, and the first will
 be orphaned - it can no longer be addressed in any way.

 The Form Designer handles this problem by opening all forms automatically
 into a LOCAL variable. After all, you can have unlimited separate copies
 of a LOCAL variable:

             LOCAL f
             f = New Myform()
             f.Open()

 This also has its downside. Because "f" is LOCAL and only visible to the
 procedure in which it was declared, no other object, procedure or
 function can address the form "f".

 Solution: Try to store your Instance References (object addresses) in
 properties as much as possible. Remember that properties are scoped to
 objects, not procedures. You can have as many of the same property as
 you have objects to "own" them.

          Procedure HeliLookupButton_OnClick
          Set procedure to c:\HeliLook.Wfm Additive
          Form.oLookup = New HeliLookForm()  &&Instance Reference stored
                                             &&in custom form property
                                             &&"oLookup"
          Form.oLookup.Open()
 
 If you need to open and manage multiple instances of a form at the 
 user's request, you may even want to store your Instance References
 in an array. Or, you may want to attach your Instance References
 directly to the dBase application object itself for "PUBLIC" scope.
 (See following section: Form, This., Class::, Super:: and _app)

 A common case in which forms may need to talk to one another is a
 "child" lookup form. Where the child form has to set a property in
 the parent form when a lookup is successfully completed.

 To do this, the Child must know the Instance Reference of the parent.
 The easiest way to "pass" the parent's "address" is to create a 
 custom property of the "child" before it is launched - and store the
 parent's reference in it:

           -----In the parent:

           Procedure CustomerLookUpButton_OnClick
           Set Proc to C:\CustLook.Wfm
           Form.oChild = New CustLookForm()
           Form.oChild.ParentName = Form     &&Store this form's address to
                                             &&a custom property of the
                                             &&"child" form.
           Form.oChild.ReadModal()

           ----In the child:

           Procedure OKButton_OnClick
           Form.ParentName.Entryfield1.Value = Customer->CustNo
           Form.Close()

 The ability of one form to talk to another is called "Interprocess Comm-
 unications". 

 The Instance or Object Reference Variable is your key to tying your
 forms together into coherent applications. You will need to develop
 your own scheme to manage object references tailored to your own pro-
 gramming style.


 Form, This, Class::, Super::, _app
 ----------------------------------
 All programming architectures provide elements by which the programmer
 can reference, at design time, things that will not be known until
 the program is run. 

 When you write a program, you have no idea what data the user will enter.
 So your language gives you fields, variables, arrays, macro-expansion and
 codeblocks as a way of referencing  "unknown-at-design-time" data.

 Objects are also "unknown-at-design-time". As programmer, you design
 the classes from which objects are created. But, it's the user who
 determines how many instances of which objects are onscreen at runtime.

 Visual dBase provides special OO language elements to enable you to
 reference your not-yet-created objects:


 Form --- "Form" is a built-in variable that holds the Instance Reference of 
         the -current- form.

         It gives you, as programmer, a convenient reference to the 
         container object at design time - even though it has not yet been
         instantiated.

         It can only be used from within a form to reference itself,
         but it can be passed on as a property or parameter to other forms,
         procedures and functions.

              Do MyProc with Form
                or
              ReCalc(Form)

         Assume you instantiate a form with: oMyHelo = New Helicopter().
         When you use "form" from within this instance, Form equals oMyHelo. 
     
              oMyHelo = New Helicopter()

              Class Helicopter(f,n) of Automobile(f,n)
                This.Width = 40
                This.Height = 40
                This.OnOpen = FORM_OnOpen
   
                Procedure FORM_OnOpen
                Form.Height = 60                &&Form=oMyHelo

              Endclass

 
 This--- "This" is another generic built-in variable to store an object 
         reference. Unlike Form, which applies only to the container
         object, "This" can refer to any object, depending on where
         it's used.

         If you are in the form area itself, not a contained control:

              This = Form

         If you are in the definition of a control within a form:

              This = Form

         If you are in a method (procedure or function within a class):
 
              This = the Control that called this Method

         Example:

              Class MyForm of Form
                This.Width = 24             &&Refers to Form
                This.OnOpen = Form_OnOpen

                Define Text MyText of This; &&Refers to Form
                Property;
                Width This.Width,;          &&Refers to Form
                OnOpen MyText_OnOpen

                Procdure Form_OnOpen
                This.Width = 40             &&Refers to Form
  
                Procedure MyText_OnOpen
                This.Width = 10             &&Refers to MyText

 Class:: and Super:: --- Class and Super are called "Scope Resolution   
        Operators". This is an overblown name for operators that tell
        Visual dBase where to look for a method.

        "Class::MyProc"  Tells Visual dBase to look ONLY in the current
        class for the method "MyProc". Don't look in other classes, or for
        a UDF with the same name. Don't look for an outside procedure or
        in the SuperClass (if there is one).

        "Super::MyProc" Tells Visual dBase to look only in the SuperClasses
        of the current class, not in the current class or any other UDF or
        procedure.

        These two operators, Super:: and Class:: are critical to
        Polymorphism (the ability to override a class' method with another).
        Visual dBase lets you override class behavior by including a
        method of the same name in the subclass. By use of these Scope
        Resolution Operators, you can explicity specify which one you want
        Visual dBase to call:

            Class HELICOPTER of AUTOMBILE
               ...
               ...
               Define Pushbutton StartButton of This;
                 Property;
                
                 OnClick CLASS::Start      &&This one executes Helicopter's
                                           &&"start" method.

                 OnClick SUPER::Start      &&This one executes Automobile's
                                           &&"start" method.
            Endclass

            Hint: "Super::" generically refers to 'the next level up'.
            If the HELICOPTER in the example above is on a form:

                  Define Automobile HELICOPTER of This;
                    Property;
                    OnClick SUPER::OnClick

            "Super::" refers to the form. Or at least it does if the
            form has an OnClick event. If not, Visual dBase will keep
            looking up the hierarchy until it finds a method with
            the right name.

            Perhaps a more accurate explanation for Super:: might be
            "the next one up that Visual dBase finds". This can
            be very helpful when you've got a custom class based on
            a custom class, based on a custom class... etc.

 _app ---  "_app" is the name of the built-in Visual dBase application
        object. This object is the "parent" of your program. It is always
        visible as long as your program is running.

        Because of this visibility (and the fact that _app, too, is an
        object), you may use custom properties of _app instead of PUBLIC
        variables. Any custom property of _app will be addressable
        throughout your program.

        Let's say you're writing a program that only has a single instance
        of each form. You don't have to worry about using an array or
        overwriting Instance Variables. You can "hang" your Instance
        Reference on the Visual dBase _app:

            _app.oMyHelo = New Helicopter()

        You've now guaranteed that "oMyHelo" will be in scope throughout
        your program, visible to every object, procedure and function.

        And if you do need an array to store your Instance Reference
        Variables, it too can be "hung" on the _app:

           _app.aForms = New Array(1)
           _app.aForms[1] = New Helicopter()
           _app.aForms[1].Open()

        where it also will be visible to all objects, procedures and
        functions.


 Releasing Objects
 -----------------
 Objects take up memory. And not just normal memory, but GDI resources,
 which are very scarce in Windows.

 Most "housekeeping" in Visual dBase is automatic. For example, when there
 are no references to an object in memory, Visual dBase destroys the object
 to free up memory. You may destroy the object explicitly in one of two
 ways:

       1. If it has a Release() method, call it to remove the object
          from memory.

       2. Destroy the Instance (Object) Reference Variable and Visual
          dBase will remove the object automatically.

       Examples:
 
          oMyHelo.Release()             &&Call the release method

          Release All Like oMyCustom    &&Release the Instance Reference

          _app.aForms[1]  = ''          &&Overwrite the Instance Reference

 Once your object is released, you may no longer need the "class blueprint"
 in memory any longer. Remove it with:

       Close Procedure Helicopter.WFM


 Using Sessions To Encapsulate
 -----------------------------
 We know that properties are -encapsulated- within their objects. We also
 know that we have to isolate the Instance Reference Variable before
 you can have multiple instances of an object without one overwriting
 another.

 But table data is another subject entirely. Your tables are scoped to
 their work areas - not to any object. Yet, there is important data
 - like record pointers - that need to be encapsulated too.

 Assume your user pops up three Helicopter forms onscreen simultaneous-
 ly. Assume, also, that each form has a Browse object on it. Number Three
 is on top when the user clicks on the scrollbar, changing the record.

 Unless you do something to prevent it, changing the record in Helicopter
 Number One will also change the record in Helicopter Number Two and
 Helicopter Number Three. The record pointer has to be encapsulated -
 protected from record pointer moves in the other Helicopter objects.

 Visual dBase provides a neat feature to handle this situation, called
 Sessions. Sessions essentially create a new user. Each user has his or
 her own work areas, record pointers, aliases and environment variables.

 By creating a Session before you launch an object you encapsulate the
 table data in each form:

       Procedure Helicopters_OnClick
          Set Proc to Heli.Wfm Additive
          _app.aForms[NextNum] = New HeliForm()  &&Create new object
                                                 &&and store the Instance
                                                 &&Reference in an array
                                                 &&Element
          Create Session                         &&Create a new Session
          Do Heli.Qbe                            &&Open required tables
                                                 &&Note: this can also
                                                 &&be done by use of the
                                                 &&form's View property.
          _app.aForms[NextNum].Open()            &&Open the form.

 When all references to your form is released, and all references to your
 form are removes (no object references remaining), Visual dBase
 automatically closes the Session.
      
      Hint: Don't use Create Session unless you really want to 
      encapsulate your data.

      If you have a child lookup form where you -do- want the record
      pointer changed in the parent, you don't want to encapsulate
      the child form. In cases like these, where you're sharing data
      between objects, don't use Create Session.
 
 .WFM, .CFM, .PRG and .CC
 ------------------------
 Forms are normally found in .WFM files, procedures in .PRG files, queries
 in QBE files, custom controls in .CC files, "Superclass" forms in .CFM 
 files.

 However, all of the above are actually just .PRG files with fancy
 extensions. The various file extensions exist so that both you and
 the Visual dBase Navigator can quickly find different types of code.
 
 Please note that your classes can be -anywhere- you want. They do not
 execute. 

 Set Procedure To <C:\MyDiskFile> is sufficient for Visual dBase to find
 your class -by name-. Therefore, any disk file that can be loaded into
 memory with "Set Procedure To" can contain a class definition. In fact,
 any loadable disk file can contain -multiple- class definitions!

      When you call "Do My.Wfm"

      Local f                                  &&This code executes
      f = New MyForm()
      f.Open()

      CLASS MyForm of Form                     &&This code does not!
       ...
       ...
      ENDCLASS

 A class definition is only used when you instantiate - when the
 blueprint is read. Therefore it must be available - in memory -
 when Visual dBase needs to read it to create an object.

 When you get more comfortable with classes and objects, you will avoid
 calling a procedure file to instantiate your objects. There really
 is no innate relationship between procedures and class definitions.

 An example of a "direct" call to an object:
     
      Procedure LookupButton_OnClick
         Set Procedure to C:\MyDir\My.WFM Additive
         Form.oLookup = New MyForm()
         Form.oLookup.ReadModal()    (or oLookup.Open())
         Form.oLookup.Release()
         Close Proc C:\MyDir\My.Wfm


 Modal: The One Time an Object Does "Return"
 -------------------------------------------
 Now that we're familiar with the basic rules of Object-Oriented Program-
 ming, let's break one.

 You will remember that we stated more than once that "objects are not
 subroutines and they do not 'return'"

 Well, there is one special case when they do. It is the Modal Form.

 Forms can be Modeless or Modal. The normal state of a form is Modeless -
 it is an unattached object floating around at your user's discretion.

 However, that makes -dependencies- very difficult. If you want to look
 up a Helicopter Number, you want to look it up for the current form - 
 not for any of three that might be onscreen. 

 And you do not want the user messing around in all the other parts of
 the program while doing this lookup.

 Hence the Modal window - which freezes program execution and allows no
 other input except for the Modal window itself. Modal forms do return
 to their calling procedures as they do not have an independent life
 of their own.

          Modeless:

          Procedure HeliLookup_OnClick
          Set Proc to HeliLook.Wfm Additive
          _app.oMyHelo = New HeliLookForm()
          _app.oMyHelo.Open()                    &&Open command issued.
          Form.Entryfield1.Value = 'Hello'       &&Then this line runs.
                                                 &&Only when the method
                                                 &&is complete does the
                                                 &&form open onscreen.

          Modal:

          Procedure HeliLookup_OnClick
          Set Proc to HeliLook.Wfm Additive
          _app.oMyHelo = New HeliLookForm()
          _app.oMyHelo.ReadModal()               &&Open command issued.
                                                 &&Program freezes until
                                                 &&oMyHelo closes.
                                                 &&Then control returns 
                                                 &&to this, the calling
                                                 &&procedure.
          Form.Entryfield1.Value = 'Hello'       &&Then this line runs.

 Modeless forms are opened with the Open() method. Modal forms are opened
 using the ReadModal() method.

         Hint: Be careful coding after an Open(). Keep in mind that the
         code following the Open() will execute BEFORE control is given
         to the form that was Open()ed.

         And, don't forget, control will never RETURN to the calling
         procedure once the form is launched.

         If you need to open a form, do something, and then come back,
         use ReadModal()

         One more thing. Don't use this "dependency" and the Modal
         "Return" capability to get around OOP programming by emulating
         procedural code. Sooner or later, you'll end up boxed in with
         no way to branch off into a form you really need for your
         program.
       

 Thinking OO Tips
 -----------------
 There's a lot to understand in "How To Think in OOP". There's a lot
 to grasp in OO programming. You won't do it my memorizing or copying
 out sample code.

 This is one of those cases where you really have to visualize diff-
 erently than you ever have before. You have to "see" your forms:
 independent, floating out there on the user's screen with no opportunity
 for the programmer to correct a field and back up.

 Here's a few quick concepts to help you focus:

    1. Making Objects
       A. Disk file loaded in memory
       B. Create a new Object (Instance)
       C. Open the object (in the case of a form)
       D. Get rid of the object
       E. Get the disk file out of memory.

    2. Objects don't Return, so do whatever you've got to do
       before the object is launched or in the object itself.

    3. Forms can be based on forms, pushbuttons on other pushbuttons.
       Try it, make a custom pushbutton with special text and bitmap.
       Drop it on a form to see how it behaves.

    4. Forms can talk to other forms only if they can find each
       other's Instance Reference Variables.
     
       Try a simple form that calls a Modal "child". Have the child
       change an entryfield value of the parent. Close the child.

    5. Events fire automatically. To get really familiar with them,
       create a sample form. Add a single event handler with one line
       of code:

                ?? CHR(7)

       That's the bell. When you hear it, you'll know the event
       "fired". Try it with a variety of events.

    6. Try making a new base form (.CFM) with a rectangle and a nice
       colored text object for a title.

       Use the FILE menu in the Form Designer to assign it as the new
       Base Class. Create new forms using your custom base class.

    7. Most important of all, don't get discouraged. Object Programming
       is so foreign to procedural programmers that it looks like an
       entirely different world. 

       Yet you've come with a special set of skills and experience as
       a programmer that will help you move into OO.

       It may take a week or a month, but one day the "light bulb" will
       go off over your head and you'll start thinking - even dreaming -
       in this new language.

 And it will be well worth the effort when you discover how productive
 Object-Oriented Programming makes you!

9-1-1995
